>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, APRIL 9: SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY MAKES A
SURPRISE VISIT TO AFGHANISTAN;
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM
KENYA, HOW THE ISLAMIC EXTREMIST
GROUP AL-SHABAB RECRUITS YOUNG
MEN INTO THE FIGHT; AND A LOOK
AT NEW LAWS THAT BLOCK ANTI-
DISCRIMINATION MEASURES FOR GAY,
LESBIAN AND TRANSGENDER PEOPLE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
MADE A SURPRISE VISIT TO
AFGHANISTAN TODAY IN AN ATTEMPT
TO EASE ESCALATING POLITICAL
TENSIONS THERE AND PROLONG A
POWER-SHARING AGREEMENT HE
BROKERED TWO YEARS AGO.
SECRETARY KERRY MET WITH AFGHAN
PRESIDENT ASHRAF GHANI, WHOSE
SECURITY FORCES CONTROL 70% OF
THE COUNTRY'S TERRITORY BUT ARE
FIGHTING A RESURGENT TALIBAN
WHICH WAS INITIALLY TOPPLED BY
THE U.S.-LED INVASION IN 2001.
KERRY ALSO MET WITH GHANI'S
POLITICAL RIVAL, ABDULLAH
ABDULLAH, WHO IS CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OF THE UNITY GOVERNMENT.
KERRY LATER TWEETED: THE
"U.S. CONTINUES TO SUPPORT
SOVEREIGNTY, INDEPENDENCE AND
TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY OF SELF-
RELIANT, DEMOCRATIC
AFGHANISTAN."
KERRY VISITED TROOPS SERVING AT
"CAMP RESOLUTE SUPPORT" IN KABUL
TO THANK THEM FOR THEIR SERVICE.
THE U.S. PLANS TO WITHDRAW
NEARLY HALF OF THE 10,000 TROOPS
STATIONED IN AFGHANISTAN NEXT
YEAR.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
KABUL, AFGHANISTAN, TO DISCUSS
SECRETARY KERRY'S TRIP IS
REUTERS' STATE DEPARTMENT
CORRESPONDENT, ARSHAD MOHAMMED.
SO, FIRST, IT SEEMS THAT THERE
ARE TWO SETS OF PROBLEMS THAT
KERRY AND THE AFGHANS ARE TRYING
TO TACKLE.
ON THE DOMESTIC SIDE THEY HAVE
POLITICAL PROBLEMS AND GIANT
SECURITY CONCERNS WITH THE
TALIBAN, NOW HEADED INTO THE
15th YEAR?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
ON THE POLITICAL SIDE THE
PROBLEM, ESSENTIALLY, IS WHETHER
THE CURRENT NATIONAL UNITY
GOVERNMENT BETWEEN PRESIDENT
GHANI AND THE SO-CALLED CHIEF
EXECUTIVE ABDULLAH CAN CONTINUE
ON BEYOND WHAT'S WIDELY BELIEVED
TO BE HERE THE END OF ITS
TWO-YEAR KIND OF MANDATE IN
SEPTEMBER.
THE SECURITY PROBLEMS ARE WELL
KNOWN.
THE TALIBAN HAS BEEN RESURGENT
OVER THE LAST YEAR.
THE FIGHTING SEASON IS ABOUT TO
START AGAIN.
AND THE U.S. GOVERNMENT IS
PLANNING TO CUT THE NUMBER OF
ITS TROOPS TO 5,500 FROM 9,800
TOWARD THE END OF THIS YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT
HAPPENS ON THAT POLITICAL FRONT
COME SEPTEMBER?
DOES THAT MEAN THE GOVERNMENT
DISSOLVES OR COLLAPSES?
>> Reporter: WELL, THERE'S A
LOT OF AMBIGUITY ABOUT WHAT
EXACTLY HAPPENS.
WHAT KERRY TODAY SAID-- AND HE'S
THE PERSON WHO BROKERED THE
AGREEMENT THAT CREATED THE UNITY
GOVERNMENT-- WAS FROM HIS POINT
OF VIEW IT DOESN'T NEED TO END
OR IT DOESN'T END IN TWO YEARS,
THAT THERE'S NO SPECIFIC
TERMINATION DATE.
WHAT HE'S ESSENTIALLY AND WHAT
U.S. OFFICIALS ARE REALLY TRYING
TO DO HERE IS TO GET THE AFGHAN
POLITICIANS, NOT JUST GHANI AND
ABDULLAH, BUT ALSO THE
OPPOSITION POLITICIANS, EXCUSE
ME, ASSOCIATED WITH
FORMER PRESIDENT KARZAI TO TRY
TO WORK OUT SOME KIND OF AN
AGREEMENT TO KEEP THE GOVERNMENT
GOING BEYOND SEPTEMBER.
THAT'S ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT
BECAUSE IN OCTOBER, AID DONORS
ARE GOING TO MEET IN BELGIUM AND
DECIDE HOW MUCH AID TO GIVE TO
AFGHANISTAN, AND THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO WANT TO GIVE MONEY IF
IT ISN'T CLEAR AN ESTABLISHED
GOVERNMENT IS IN PLACE TO SPEND
THE MONEY WISELY.
>> Sreenivasan: SECRETARY
KERRY HAD A SIMILAR TRIP IN
BAGHDAD.
THERE THE COMMON FOE IS ISIS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AGAIN, HE'S TRYING TO PUSH IRAQI
POLITICIANS TO ACHIEVE
CONSENSUS.
THE CASE THERE IT'S TRYING TO
CRAFT A CABINET FOR THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT THAT'S ENOUGH FOR THE
POLITICIANS TO LIVE WITH.
YOU NEED TO HAVE IN GENERAL A
FUNCTIONING, WHAT COHESIVE
GOVERNMENT TO PROSECUTE THE WAR
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE MIL-
ITANTS IN IRAQI OR AGAINST THE
TALIBAN HERE IN AFGHANISTAN.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, WHEN
YOU'RE ON THESE LONG PLANE RIDES
WITH HIM AND YOU HAVE ACCESS TO
THE SECRETARY, DO YOU EVER SEE
HIS OPTIMISM WANING?
WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT THIS,
THOUSANDS OF AMERICAN LIVES HAVE
BEEN LOST.
IT'S BEEN NOW 15 YEARS.
WE'VE SPENT PROBABLY A COUPLE OF
TRILLION DOLLARS IN IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN, AND HERE WE ARE IN
SITUATIONS WHERE BOTH OF THE
COUNTRIES, PARTS OF THEM, ARE
COMPLETELY LAWLESS STILL.
>> MY IMPRESSION IS MOST
SECRETARIES OF STATE ARE
ALMOST CONGENITALLY OPTIMISTIC
BECAUSE THAT'S PART OF THEIR
JOB.
THEIR JOB IS TO TRY TO FIND WAYS
TO SOLVE PROBLEMS.
WE DO SEE SECRETARY KERRY ON THE
PLANE OFF THE RECORD SOMETIMES.
BUT MOST SECRETARIES OF STATE I
HAVE COVERED, AND I'VE COVERED
FOUR NOW, TEND TO BE LOOKING FOR
SOLUTIONS RATHER THAN WRINGING
THEIR HANDS OVER THE PROBLEMS
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT
ARSHAD MOHAMMED JOINING US TODAY
VIA SKYPE FROM KABUL.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: NORTH KOREA
CLAIMS IT HAS SUCCESSFULLY
TESTED AN ENGINE FOR A LONG-
RANGE MISSILE THAT COULD REACH
THE UNITED STATES.
THE STATE-RUN NEWS CHANNEL
SHOWED PICTURES TODAY OF NORTH
KOREAN LEADER KIM JONG UN
VISITING THE TEST SITE.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAY THERE'S NO
PROOF THE TEST WORKED.
SOUTH KOREA ADDED THE NORTH IS
YEARS AWAY FROM DEVELOPING
INTERCONTINENTAL MISSILES.
NORTH KOREA LAUNCHED A MEDIUM-
RANGE BALLISTIC MISSILE LAST
MONTH AND CONDUCTED A NUCLEAR
WEAPONS TEST IN JANUARY.
MILITANTS FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP, OR ISIS, HAVE FREED MOST
OF THE 300 CEMENT FACTORY
WORKERS THE GROUP KIDNAPPED
THREE DAYS AGO IN SYRIA.
VIDEO RELEASED TODAY SHOWED THE
MEN WALKING DOWN A ROAD NEAR
DAMASCUS.
THE BRITISH-BASED SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAID ALL BUT 30 OF THE MEN WERE
RELEASED, BUT ISIS HAD KILLED AT
LEAST FOUR NON-MUSLIM CAPTIVES.
IN BELGIUM, FEDERAL PROSECUTORS
SAY THE SUSPECT ARRESTED
YESTERDAY HAS CONFESSED.
HE IS THE THIRD MAN SEEN IN THE
SECURITY VIDEO RIGHT BEFORE THE
ISIS TERRORIST ATTACK ON THE
BRUSSELS AIRPORT.
THE SUSPECT, MOHAMED ABRINI, HAD
BEEN DESCRIBED AS THE "MAN IN
THE HAT."
BELGIUM POLICE ARE DETAINING
FIVE OTHER MEN SUSPECTED OF TIES
TO THE MARCH 22 SUICIDE BOMBINGS
THAT KILLED 32 PEOPLE AT THE
AIRPORT AND A CENTRAL BRUSSELS
TRAIN STATION.
BRITAIN'S OPPOSITION LABOR PARTY
IS DEMANDING PRIME MINISTER
DAVID CAMERON GIVE A FULL
ACCOUNTING OF HIS FINANCIAL
DEALINGS TO PARLIAMENT ON
MONDAY.
THIS COMES AFTER THE "PANAMA
PAPERS," PUBLISHED IN NEWSPAPERS
DURING THE LAST WEEK, REVEALED
CAMERON HAD OWNED SHARES IN A
BAHAMAS-BASED TRUST FROM 1997 TO
2010 AND PROFITED $30,000 WHEN
HE SOLD THEM.
IN A SPEECH BEFORE HIS
CONSERVATIVE PARTY TODAY IN
LONDON, CAMERON ADMITTED HE HAD
MISHANDLED QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
INVESTMENT WHICH HE INHERITED
FROM HIS LATE FATHER, A
STOCKBROKER AND CLIENT OF THE
PANAMA LAW FIRM AT THE CENTER OF
THE LEAKED PAPERS.
>> I KNOW THAT THERE ARE LESSONS
TO LEARN, AND I WILL LEARN THEM.
AND DON'T BLAME NUMBER 10
DOWNING STREET OR NAMELESS
ADVISORS.
BLAME ME, AND I WILL LEARN THE
LESSONS.
>> Sreenivasan: CAMERON SAID HE
WILL RELEASE SIX YEARS OF TAX
RETURNS TO PROVE HE PAID ALL THE
TAXES OWED, AND PROMISED TO
CRACK DOWN ON TAX EVASION IN THE
U.K.
FEDERAL PROSECUTORS SAY DENNIS
HASTERT, A FORMER REPUBLICAN
SPEAKER OF THE U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, MOLESTED AT
LEAST FOUR TEENAGE BOYS WHILE HE
WAS A WRESTLING COACH AT AN
ILLINOIS HIGH SCHOOL FROM 1965
TO 1981.
PROSECUTORS REVEALED THE DETAILS
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN A PRE-
SENTENCING DOCUMENT FILED IN
COURT LATE YESTERDAY.
HASTERT CAN'T BE CHARGED WITH
SEXUAL ABUSE DUE TO THE STATUTE
OF LIMITATIONS, BUT HE HAS PLEAD
GUILTY TO STRUCTURING BANK
WITHDRAWALS IN SMALL INCREMENTS
TO PAY $1.7 MILLION CASH IN HUSH
MONEY TO ONE VICTIM WHO WAS 14
WHEN HASTERT ABUSED HIM.
PROSECUTORS ARE ASKING FOR SIX
MONTHS IN PRISON WHEN HASTERT,
WHO IS 74, IS SENTENCED ON APRIL
27.
HASTERT, SEEKING PROBATION, SAID
IN A COURT FILING HE IS
"PROFOUNDLY SORRY" FOR HIS
CONDUCT.
HE SPENT 20 YEARS IN THE HOUSE
AND WAS SPEAKER FROM 1999 TO
2007.
IN THE PRESIDENTIAL RACE, IT'S
NOW SEVEN IN A ROW FOR BERNIE
SANDERS.
THE VERMONT SENATOR WON TODAY'S
DEMOCRATIC CAUCUSES IN WYOMING
AND STOOD TO GAIN A SLIM
MAJORITY OF THE STATE'S 14
PLEDGED DELEGATES TO THE
NATIONAL CONVENTION IN JULY.
SANDERS AND FORMER FIRST LADY
HILLARY CLINTON BOTH CAMPAIGNED
IN NEW YORK TODAY AHEAD OF THE
APRIL 19 PRIMARY THERE.
SHE STILL LEADS HIM BY MORE THAN
200 PLEDGED DELEGATES IN THE
TALLY BY THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
REPUBLICANS IN COLORADO HELD A
STATE CONVENTION TODAY TO
ALLOCATE 13 MORE DELEGATES TO
THEIR NATIONAL CONVENTION.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ SWEPT 21
DELEGATES IN CAUCUSES THERE
YESTERDAY.
YOU CAN FOLLOW ALL THE RESULTS
ONLINE WITH US AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: BRUCE
SPRINGSTEEN AND HIS E-STREET
BAND HAVE CANCELLED THEIR
CONCERT SCHEDULED FOR TOMORROW
IN GREENSBORO, NORTH CAROLINA,
TO PROTEST THE STATE'S NEW LAW
BLOCKING ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
MEASURES FOR GAY, LESBIAN AND
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE.
SPRINGSTEEN SAID THE LAW
OVERTURNS PROGRESS IN
RECOGNIZING THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF
ALL PEOPLE.
HIS BOYCOTT IS ONE OF GROWING
NUMBER OF ECONOMIC HITS TO NORTH
CAROLINA AND OTHER STATES
ADOPTING SIMILAR LAWS.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THAT
IS "POLITICO" REPORTER KEVIN
ROBILLARD.
HOW SIGNIFICANT HAS THIS BEEN
FOR NORTH CAROLINA?
I MEAN, IT'S BEEN BAD PRESS FOR
THEM ALL WEEK.
DOES THIS MAKE AN ECONOMIC
IMPACT?
>> CLEARLY, IT'S STARTING TO
HAVE ONE.
LAST NIGHT, THERE WERE SOME
REPORTS FROM THE NORTH CAROLINA
MEDIA THAT, YOU KNOW,
SIGNIFICANT NUMBERS OF
CONVENTIONS WERE EITHER
CANCELLING OR RECONSIDERING
GOING TO NORTH CAROLINA, WHICH
IS SOMETHING THAT TRANSLATED TO,
YOU KNOW, THE THOUSANDS,
POTENTIALLY THE TENS OF
THOUSANDS IN HOTEL ROOM STAYS.
AND, YOU KNOW, CHANCES ARE WHEN
YOU'RE STAYING IN A HOTEL,
YOU'RE ALSO GOING OUT TO EAT
AND, YOU KNOW, PURCHASING THINGS
AT NEARBY STORES FOR YOUR FAMILY
OR WHATEVER.
SO, YEAH, THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
HAS A RIPPLE EFFECT WHEN, YOU
KNOW, THESE BOYCOTTS OR
DECISIONS NOT TO GO TO NORTH
CAROLINA ARE START STACKING UP.
>> Sreenivasan: I HEARD THE
N.B.A. ALL-STAR GAME IS SUPPOSED
TO BE IN CHARLOTTE NEXT YEAR AND
EVEN CHARLES BARKLEY IS ASKING
FOR IT TO BE MOVED, A FORMER
PLAYER AND NOW A COMMENTATOR.
AND PAYPAL PULLED THE OPENING OF
A 400-PERSON FACILITY IN THE
STATE.
>> YEAH, THAT WAS A REALLY
SIGNIFICANT ONE BECAUSE, ALSO,
ONE THING THAT EVERY STATE IS
TRYING TO DO IS TRYING TO WOO
TECH COMPANIES LIKE PAYPAL TO
THEIR STATE.
SO, IF THESE TECH COMPANIES IN
PARTICULAR MAKE A BIG STAND ON
THIS, THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
COULD REALLY DISCOURAGE
GOVERNORS FROM PASSING THESE
SIMILAR LAWS.
YOU HAVE SEEN DEMOCRATS PUT OUT
THEIR HANDS AND SAY, "HEY,
PAYPAL, COME HERE," THE
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNOR OF MONTANA
SAID PAYPAL WE'LL COME UP WITH A
TAX PACKAGE FOR TO YOU MOVE HERE
INSTEAD OF MOVING TO NORTH
CAROLINA.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS ALSO
INTERESTING IS IT SEEMS TO PIT
THE TWO DIFFERENT SIDES OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY, THE BUSINESS
SIDE VERSUS THE SOCIAL
CONSERVATIVE SIDE.
>> THIS IS AN ONGOING FIGHT
BETWEEN THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
THESE WINGS ARE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO CLASS ON WHAT THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY SHOULD
PRIORITIZE.
BUT THESE ARE COMING INTO DIRECT
CONFLICT, AND THAT'S REALLY A
PROBLEM FOR A LOT OF REPUBLICANS
BECAUSE THE SOCIAL CONSERVATIVES
TEND TO PROVIDE SORT OF GRASS
ROOTS OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
THEY'RE THE REPUBLICAN PARTY'S
MOST RELIABLE VOTERS.
BUT THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY IS,
QUITE FRANKLY, WHERE MOST OF THE
MONEY FUNDING THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY COMES FROM.
AND THAT'S THEIR BIGGEST SOURCE
OF MONEY SO THEY CAN AIR TV ADS
AND WHATNOT.
SO IT REALLY IS A SITUATION IF
YOU'RE A REPUBLICAN POLITICIAN,
YOU DON'T WANT TO ANGER EITHER
ONE OF THESE GROUPS.
SO FAR IN THIS FIGHT, THE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY IS WINNING
JUST BECAUSE THEY SEEM TO HAVE
THE ECONOMIC LEVERAGE AND YOU
HAVE SEEN IT USED IN NORTH
CAROLINA AND YOU SAW IT USED
VERY WELL IN INDIANA, WHICH HAD
A SIMILAR CONTROVERSY LAST YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES THIS
TRICKLE UP, AT LEAST ON A
NATIONAL SCALE, EITHER IN THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OR OTHER,
LET'S SAY, GUBERNATORIAL
ELECTIONS AROUND THE COUNTRY?
>> SO, IN THE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION, SO FAR, IT HASN'T
REALLY IMPACTED THE G.O.P.
PRIMARY ALL THAT MUCH.
THAT SAID, AT THIS POINT, A
MAJORITY OF AMERICANS DO SUPPORT
GAY RIGHTS, AND IT HURTS THE
IMAGE OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY IN
GENERAL.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING THAT, YOU
KNOW, DON'T BE SURPRISED IF YOU
SEE HILLARY CLINTON REALLY GOING
OUT OF HER WAY TO SPEAK OUT
AGAINST LAWS LIKE THIS IF SHE
BECOMES THE GENERAL ELECTION
NOMINEE.
AS FOR GUBERNATORIAL RACES,
YEAH, THERE'S REALLY GOING TO BE
TWO ON THE BALLOT IN THE FALL
WHERE THERE IS REALLY GOING TO
BE THE CENTRAL ISSUE.
PAT McCRORY FROM NORTH
CAROLINA IS UP FOR REELECTION IN
NOVEMBER.
HE IS FACING THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL THE OF NORTH CAROLINA,
ROY COOPER.
AND IN INDIANA, WHICH, AGAIN,
HAD A VERY SIMILAR CONTROVERSY
LAST YEAR, MIKE PENCE IS FACING
A DEMOCRAT NAMED JOHN GREGG.
BOTH OF THOSE ARE EXPECTED TO BE
VERY, VERY CONTESTED ELECTIONS
AND TWO OF THE CLOSEST
GOVERNORS' RACES IN THE COUNTRY
AND THIS MIGHT TURN OUT TO BE
THE DECISIVE ISSUE IN BOTH OF
THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: POLITICO
REPORTER KEVIN ROBILLARD JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> GREAT TO BE ON.
>> Sreenivasan: TONIGHT, WE
BRING YOU THE SECOND PART OF OUR
FOUR-PART NEWSHOUR SERIES,
"INSIDE KENYA."
FOR A DECADE, AL-SHABAB, AN AL
QAEDA-LINKED MILITANT GROUP
BASED IN SOMALIA, HAS LAUNCHED
TERROR ATTACKS IN KENYA, ITS
NEIGHBOR TO THE SOUTH.
AL-SHABAB WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE 2013 ATTACKS ON THE WESTGATE
MALL IN KENYA'S CAPITAL,
NAIROBI, AN ATTACK THAT KILLED
67 PEOPLE.
IT WAS ALSO RESPONSIBLE FOR LAST
YEAR'S ATTACK ON GARISSA
UNIVERSITY IN KENYA THAT KILLED
MORE THAN 120.
THE U.S. MILITARY ESTIMATES AL-
SHABAB HAS ENLISTED 5,000 MEN,
AND KENYA CONTRIBUTES MORE
FOREIGN FIGHTERS TO AL-SHABAB
THAN ANY OTHER COUNTRY.
WITH THE HELP OF THE PULITZER
CENTER ON CRISIS REPORTING,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT NICK
SCHIFRIN AND PRODUCER ZACH
FANNIN WENT TO KENYA, WHERE THEY
MET UP WITH AL-SHABAB RECRUITS.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SCHIFFRIN REPORTS ON WHY SOME
YOUNG MEN JOIN THE GROUP AND ON
EFFORTS TO GET THEM OUT.
>> Reporter: IN THE PUMWANI SLUM
ON THE EDGE OF NAIROBI, RADICALS
FIND FERTILE GROUND AND WILLING
RECRUITS, INCLUDING THESE THREE
KENYAN MUSLIMS.
EACH REQUESTED WE CHANGE THEIR
NAMES AND TAPE FROM THE BACK OR
SIDE.
THEY FEAR THE POLICE AND AL-
SHABAB SOLDIERS THEY USED TO
FIGHT WITH.
>> Reporter: DO YOU REMEMBER
YOUR FIRST BIG BATTLE WITH AL-
SHABAB?
>> Reporter: THEY WERE ALL
PRAYING AT A BUILDING THAT
TOWERS OVER THE SLUM, THE
PUMWANI RIYADH MOSQUE, WHEN, IN
2007, THIS MAN, SHEIKH AHMED
IMAN ALI, TOOK POWER.
HE WAS A YOUNG AND CHARISMATIC
KENYAN PREACHER.
HIS FOLLOWERS EMBRACED HIM,
INCLUDING MOHAMMAD.
>> (translated): THOSE TWO
YEARS THAT SHEIK AHMED IMAN WAS
THERE, HE WOKE US UP.
>> Reporter: IN 2009, SHEIK IMAN
LEFT THE MOSQUE TO LEAD AL-
SHABAB'S PROPAGANDA, BUT NOT
BEFORE HE HAD RADICALIZED
PERHAPS HUNDREDS OF KENYANS WITH
A MESSAGE OF ECONOMIC
EMPOWERMENT, INCLUDING HASAN.
>> Reporter: ABDUL SAYS HE TOO
WAS ENTICED BY MONEY.
>> Reporter: AS A TEENAGER, HE
HAD BECOME A THIEF TO AFFORD
FOOD.
WHAT DID YOU USE TO DO ON THESE
STREETS RIGHT HERE?
>> Reporter: AFTER BEING
ARRESTED AND JAILED, ABDUL
LEARNED ABOUT VIOLENT JIHAD FROM
FELLOW KENYAN PRISONERS WHO'D
FOUGHT WITH AL-SHABAB IN
SOMALIA.
>> Reporter: THEIR BUSINESS WAS
AL-SHABAB.
THEY CONVINCED ABDUL, WHO WAS A
RECENT MUSLIM CONVERT, THAT
FIGHTING IN SOMALIA WAS
LUCRATIVE.
HE WAS GIVEN $500 TO JOIN AND
$100 A WEEK.
THAT WAS GOOD MONEY FOR YOU,
RIGHT?
>> Reporter: THAT WAS SHEIKH
IMAN'S SECOND INROAD, USING
PROPAGANDA VIDEOS TO IDENTIFY
KENYAN POLICE AS OPPRESSORS.
>> (translated): IF MUSLIM
CLERICS IN KENYA STOOD FOR
TRUTH, THEY SHOULD HAVE
ANNOUNCED JIHAD LONG AGO AS
MUSLIMS WERE BEING OPPRESSED.
>> Reporter: THIS POLICE
OFFICER, WHOM WE'VE GRANTED
ANONYMITY, ADMITS HE STOLE FROM
MUSLIMS WHO COULDN'T DEFEND
THEMSELVES AS A WAY TO
SUPPLEMENT HIS OWN INCOME.
>> Reporter: SO, YOU BELIEVE
THAT YOUR WORK INCREASED
RADICALIZATION.
>> Reporter: AL-SHABAB PORTRAYS
KENYA AS A PREDOMINANTLY
CHRISTIAN NATION THAT OPPRESSES
MUSLIMS.
SHEIK IMAN PROMISES REVENGE IN
THE NAME OF ISLAM.
>> (translated): THE DAY THEY
DECIDE TO COME OUT FOR A
FACE-TO-FACE BATTLE, I AM GOING
TO PUT AWAY MY AK-47 AND TAKE
OUT MY SWORD.
THESE FELLOWS KNOW NOTHING ABOUT
BATTLE.
>> Reporter: THAT MESSAGE OF
REVENGE AND EMPOWERMENT LURED
MOHAMED TO JOIN AL-SHABAB.
>> (translated): THE
OPPRESSION THAT WAS TAKING PLACE
COULD NOT BE ERADICATED THROUGH
WORDS.
THE ONLY RESPONSE WAS TO TAKE UP
ARMS TO FIGHT THE OPPRESSION.
>> Reporter: THIS IS CALLED
LITTLE MOGADISHU?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: COMMUNITY ORGANIZER
ROBERT OCHOLA HEARD ABOUT SHEIKH
IMAN'S RADICALIZATION CAMPAIGN
AND STARTED A GRASSROOTS
ORGANIZATION TO FIGHT IT.
>> Reporter: ALL AROUND HIM, HE
SEES THE INCUBATORS OF
RADICALISM-- MUSLIMS LIVING WITH
POVERTY, ILLITERACY,
HOPELESSNESS.
>> Reporter: OCHOLA HOSTS
COMMUNITY EVENTS DESIGNED TO
COMBAT AL-SHABAB'S APPEALS.
SPEAKERS DISCUSS THE VALUE OF
HONEST WORK AND MODERATE ISLAM.
THAT MESSAGE TURNED ABDUL AROUND
BEFORE HE COULD MAKE IT TO
SOMALIA.
>> Reporter: OCHOLA PROVIDES
ABDUL AND OTHER YOUNG MEN WHAT
THIS COMMUNITY OFTEN LACKS,
POSITIVE ROLE MODELS.
>> Reporter: OCHOLA HOSTS A
RADIO SHOW TO REACH YOUNG MEN
AND ATTRACT WOULD-BE MENTORS SO
FEWER YOUTH FROM PUMWANI DIE
FIGHTING IN SOMALIA.
>> Reporter: AND NOT ONLY IS IT
PRACTICAL, NOT THEORETICAL, BUT
IT'S ALSO LITERALLY LIFE AND
DEATH.
>> Reporter: HOW MANY FRIENDS
HAVE YOU BURIED?
>> Reporter: ABDUL'S FINAL
REJECTION OF AL-SHABAB CAME
AFTER BURYING ONE TOO MANY
FRIENDS.
>> Reporter: MOHAMED SAYS HE
LEFT AL-SHABAB WHEN HIS LEADERS
IN SOMALIA TREATED KENYANS AS
SECOND CLASS RECRUITS AND
WITHHELD WEAPONS FROM KENYAN
RECRUITS.
>> Reporter: TODAY, MORE THAN
SIX YEARS AFTER SHEIKH IMAN
LEFT, THE PUMWANI RIYADH MOSQUE
IS TRYING TO ERASE HIS LEGACY.
A MADRASSA TEACHES ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL KIDS MAINSTREAM RELIGIOUS
LESSONS, A SECULAR SCHOOL
TEACHES THREE- TO SIX-YEAR-OLDS,
AND A SOUP KITCHEN OFFERS MUCH
NEEDED FREE FOOD.
THE MOSQUE DE-RADICALIZES WITH
MODERATE PREACHING AND JOB
TRAINING.
IMAM JUMA MOHAMED SAYS THEY
OFFER RESOURCES THE GOVERNMENT
FAILS TO DELIVER.
>> (translated): THE
GOVERNMENT IS NEGLECTING US AS
IF THEY WERE SAYING, "BECAUSE
YOU ARE MUSLIM, IF YOU WANT TO
DIE, YOU DIE HERE."
THEY DON'T SUPPORT US.
>> Reporter: AND THAT MEANS THAT
EVEN IF THE MOSQUE NO LONGER
PREACHES VIOLENCE, AL-SHABAB CAN
STILL EXPLOIT THE SAME ROADS TO
RADICALISM.
>> Reporter: AND TODAY, THAT
MESSAGE OF RECRUITMENT IS STILL
POPULAR?
>> Sreenivasan: ON MONDAY'S
NEWSHOUR, "INSIDE KENYA"
CONTINUES WITH A LOOK AT
CORRUPTION AND HOW IT SEEPS INTO
EVERY FACET OF GOVERNMENT AND
PRIVATE BUSINESS.
LEARN MORE ABOUT AL-SHABAB,
INCLUDING THE GROUP'S ORIGINS
AND HISTORY.
READ OUR PRIMER ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENATE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE IS
DRAFTING A BILL TO REQUIRE
COMPANIES LIKE APPLE TO ASSIST
LAW ENFORCEMENT AFTER A JUDGE
GRANTS A WARRANT TO UNLOCK
ENCRYPTED SMARTPHONES FOR ACCESS
TO EVIDENCE.
THE F.B.I. WANTS THAT TOOL FOR
TERRORISM INVESTIGATIONS, BUT SO
DO LOCAL POLICE AND PROSECUTORS
TO SOLVE CASES, AS WE REPORTED
IN LAST WEEK'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT
ABOUT AN UNSOLVED MURDER IN
LOUISIANA.
MANY VIEWERS LIKE YOU TOOK THE
OPPORTUNITY TO COMMENT ON THAT
STORY AND THE DEBATE ON OUR WEB
SITE AND OUR FACEBOOK PAGE.
CAROL HARRIS KING POSTED THIS:
"JUST LIKE WHEN GETTING A SEARCH
WARRANT TO SEARCH PROPERTY, A
SEARCH WARRANT SHOULD BE ALL
THAT IS NEEDED TO UNLOCK THE
PHONE."
JIM ROUTHIER ADDED: "NO ONE
ARGUES WITH THE RIGHT OF
GOVERNMENT TO EXAMINE A PHONE
WITH A PROPER WARRANT.
JUST DON'T ASK PRIVATE INDUSTRY
TO DO THE JOB OF POLICE BY
BREAKING INTO THE PHONE FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT."
CAROLYN ADESSA DISAGREED,
SAYING: "NO BACK DOORS TO OUR
PHONES BY GOVERNMENT AGENCIES,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
IT'S JUST A SMOKESCREEN FOR
INVASION OF PRIVACY."
AND THERE WAS THIS COMMENT FROM
MAGGIE DOOLEY: "THE ISSUE IS NOT
EVEN PRIVACY, IT'S MORE ABOUT
TRUST.
DO I TRUST LAW ENFORCEMENT, THE
JUDICIAL SYSTEM, THE GOVERNMENT
TO ACT IN A RESPONSIBLE MANNER?
SADLY, THE ANSWER IS NO."
NEAL LEWIS SAID, SIMPLY: "OPEN
THOSE PHONES SO THE EVIDENCE CAN
BE USED TO PROSECUTE CRIMINALS.
SOME OF THE PRIVACY ADVOCATES
ARE JUST PARANOID."
AND FINALLY, THERE WAS THIS
FROM RACHEL KENT: "THIS IS WHY A
TRUSTED LOVED ONE SHOULD HAVE
KNOWLEDGE OF YOUR PASSCODES."
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS ONLINE AT
www.pbs./newshour, ON OUR
FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY,
A NEW PATH TO APPEAL CONVICTIONS
BASED ON FLAWED SCIENTIFIC
EVIDENCE.
>> JUNK SCIENCE HAS PROVEN WE
HAVE NUMEROUS PEOPLE, MAYBE
LARGE NUMBERS NATIONWIDE,
WRONGFULLY CONVICTED.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE NEXT
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
AND FINALLY, FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN NEARLY A CENTURY, IT'S ABOUT
TO COST LESS TO MAIL A LETTER IN
THE UNITED STATES.
TOMORROW, THE PRICE OF A FIRST
CLASS STAMP GOES FROM 49 TO 47
CENTS, THE FIRST DROP SINCE
1919.
THE POSTAL SERVICE OPPOSED THE
CHANGE IMPOSED BY AN INDEPENDENT
COMMISSION AND PROJECTS IT WILL
LOSE $2 BILLION IN REVENUE THIS
YEAR AS A RESULT.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.